Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station: the anticonvulsant drugs.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the anticonvulsant drugs. How are they classified by mechanism?
The anticonvulsants act by reducing neuronal excitability or enhancing inhibition,
and they are grouped by their principal mechanism.
The sodium-channel blockers — phenytoin, carbamazepine,
lamotrigine and lacosamide — stabilise the inactivated state of the voltage-gated
sodium channel, reducing the high-frequency firing of seizures.
The drugs enhancing GABA-mediated inhibition include the benzodiazepines and
barbiturates, which act at the GABA-A receptor, and vigabatrin and tiagabine,
which raise GABA levels.
The calcium-channel modulators include ethosuximide,
which blocks T-type calcium channels in absence seizures, and the gabapentinoids.
Levetiracetam acts on the synaptic vesicle protein two-A,
modulating neurotransmitter release.
And sodium valproate and topiramate have multiple mechanisms.
So the anticonvulsants are classified by mechanism into sodium-channel blockers,
GABA enhancers, calcium-channel modulators,
the synaptic-vesicle agent levetiracetam,
and broad-spectrum multi-mechanism drugs — the mechanism guiding which seizure
types each treats.
Describe phenytoin.
Phenytoin is a sodium-channel-blocking anticonvulsant with distinctive and
examinable pharmacology.
Its metabolism is saturable, following zero-order kinetics at therapeutic
concentrations, so that once the enzymes are saturated a small increase in dose
causes a disproportionate, non-linear rise in plasma level,
giving it a narrow therapeutic index and the need for monitoring.
It is a potent inducer of the hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes,
accelerating the metabolism of many drugs, and is highly protein-bound,
with numerous interactions.
Its adverse effects include, acutely,
dose-related cerebellar and vestibular effects — nystagmus, ataxia, slurred speech;
chronically, gingival hyperplasia, hirsutism and coarsening of the features; and,
given intravenously, cardiovascular depression and arrhythmias if injected rapidly,
and the purple-glove syndrome.
So phenytoin is a sodium-channel blocker notable for its saturable zero-order
kinetics and narrow therapeutic index,
its potent enzyme induction and interactions, and its acute neurological,
chronic cosmetic, and intravenous cardiovascular adverse effects.
Describe carbamazepine and sodium valproate.
Carbamazepine is a sodium-channel blocker used for focal seizures and in trigeminal
neuralgia and bipolar disorder.
It is a potent inducer of hepatic enzymes, including of its own metabolism,
with many interactions; it can cause hyponatraemia through a syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone, blood dyscrasias,
and serious skin reactions including Stevens-Johnson syndrome,
the risk linked to a particular HLA type in some populations,
so genetic testing is advised.
Sodium valproate is a broad-spectrum agent effective across seizure types,
acting by several mechanisms.
It is an enzyme inhibitor, in contrast to the inducers,
and its serious adverse effects are hepatotoxicity, pancreatitis, thrombocytopenia,
and, critically, marked teratogenicity — neural tube and other defects and
neurodevelopmental harm — so its use in women of childbearing potential is highly
restricted under a pregnancy-prevention programme.
So carbamazepine is an enzyme-inducing sodium-channel blocker with hyponatraemia
and skin-reaction risks, and valproate a broad-spectrum enzyme inhibitor limited by
hepatotoxicity and serious teratogenicity.
Describe levetiracetam and lamotrigine.
Levetiracetam has become widely used because of its favourable profile.
It acts on the synaptic vesicle protein two-A to modulate neurotransmitter release,
is broad-spectrum, has few drug interactions as it is largely renally excreted
without significant enzyme effects, and can be given intravenously,
making it convenient perioperatively and in status epilepticus.
Its main adverse effects are behavioural and mood disturbances — irritability and,
occasionally, depression.
Lamotrigine is a sodium-channel blocker,
broad-spectrum and generally well tolerated, used in epilepsy and bipolar disorder;
its notable adverse effect is a skin rash that can progress to the serious
Stevens-Johnson syndrome, so it must be introduced slowly by gradual dose
escalation to reduce this risk.
So levetiracetam is a broad-spectrum agent with few interactions,
renally cleared and available intravenously but causing behavioural effects,
and lamotrigine a well-tolerated sodium-channel blocker requiring slow introduction
because of the risk of a serious rash.
How is status epilepticus managed pharmacologically?
Status epilepticus — a prolonged seizure or repeated seizures without recovery,
conventionally lasting more than five minutes — is an emergency requiring prompt,
stepwise treatment alongside attention to the airway,
breathing and circulation and the correction of causes such as hypoglycaemia.
The first-line treatment is a benzodiazepine — intravenous lorazepam,
or midazolam or diazepam — repeated once if needed.
If seizures continue, a second-line intravenous anticonvulsant is given —
levetiracetam, phenytoin or fosphenytoin, or sodium valproate.
If status persists despite these, it is refractory and requires induction of
general anaesthesia with an agent such as propofol, thiopental or midazolam,
with intubation, ventilation and continuous monitoring in intensive care.
So status epilepticus is managed in steps — a benzodiazepine first,
then a second-line agent such as levetiracetam, phenytoin or valproate,
then general anaesthesia for refractory status — with simultaneous resuscitation
and correction of the cause.
What is the perioperative significance of enzyme induction by anticonvulsants?
Several anticonvulsants — notably phenytoin,
carbamazepine and the barbiturates — are potent inducers of the hepatic cytochrome
P450 enzymes, which has important perioperative consequences.
By accelerating the metabolism of other drugs,
chronic enzyme induction increases the requirements for,
and shortens the action of, drugs metabolised by these enzymes:
patients may show resistance to certain neuromuscular blocking agents,
requiring larger or more frequent doses,
and altered handling of opioids and other anaesthetic drugs.
Induction also affects the metabolism of other medications the patient takes.
By contrast, valproate is an enzyme inhibitor, with the opposite effect.
The practical implications are to anticipate altered drug requirements,
to monitor neuromuscular blockade objectively, and to be aware of interactions.
So enzyme induction by phenytoin, carbamazepine and barbiturates accelerates the
metabolism of anaesthetic and other drugs,
causing resistance to neuromuscular blockers and altered drug handling,
which the anaesthetist anticipates and manages with monitoring.
How should antiepileptic drugs be managed around surgery?
The overriding principle is to maintain seizure control by continuing the patient's
antiepileptic drugs without interruption through the perioperative period,
since missed doses risk breakthrough seizures.
The regular medication is given up to and including the morning of surgery and
resumed as soon as possible afterwards; where the oral route is unavailable,
an alternative is used — several agents, such as levetiracetam,
phenytoin and valproate, are available intravenously, allowing substitution.
The anaesthetic technique avoids drugs that lower the seizure threshold where
possible, and certain agents are used thoughtfully in epileptics.
Enzyme induction is anticipated as discussed.
Electrolyte and metabolic disturbances that lower the threshold are corrected.
So antiepileptic drugs are continued without interruption,
substituted by the intravenous route if needed,
with the anaesthetic chosen to avoid lowering the seizure threshold and with
anticipation of enzyme-induction effects — continuity of seizure control being
paramount.
Pull it together: how do you approach the anticonvulsants rationally?
I would understand the anticonvulsants by their mechanisms — sodium-channel
blockade, GABA enhancement, calcium-channel modulation,
synaptic-vesicle modulation and multi-mechanism action — which determines the
seizure types they treat and guides the choice,
with broad-spectrum agents such as valproate and levetiracetam covering most types
and specific agents for particular syndromes.
I would respect the distinctive pharmacology and adverse effects:
phenytoin's zero-order kinetics and enzyme induction; carbamazepine's induction,
hyponatraemia and skin reactions; valproate's hepatotoxicity and serious
teratogenicity restricting its use in women of childbearing potential;
lamotrigine's rash needing slow introduction;
and levetiracetam's favourable profile but behavioural effects.
Perioperatively I would continue the drugs without interruption,
substitute intravenously if needed,
anticipate enzyme induction altering anaesthetic drug requirements,
avoid lowering the seizure threshold,
and manage status epilepticus in a stepwise manner.
So rational use is mechanism-based,
mindful of each drug's distinctive kinetics and toxicity,
and perioperatively maintains uninterrupted seizure control.
Describe the GABA-A receptor and the drugs acting on it.
The GABA-A receptor is the principal inhibitory neurotransmitter receptor in the
brain, a ligand-gated chloride channel;
when its natural agonist gamma-aminobutyric acid binds, the channel opens,
chloride enters the neurone, hyperpolarising it and reducing its excitability — the
basis of inhibition and of seizure suppression.
Several anticonvulsant and anaesthetic drugs act here.
The benzodiazepines bind a distinct site and increase the frequency of channel
opening in response to GABA, enhancing inhibition,
used in acute seizure termination and status epilepticus.
The barbiturates bind another site and prolong channel opening,
and at high doses open the channel directly,
used in refractory seizures and as anaesthetics.
Other anaesthetics, including propofol, also act at this receptor.
So the GABA-A receptor is the inhibitory chloride channel through which the
benzodiazepines, by increasing opening frequency, and the barbiturates,
by prolonging opening, enhance inhibition to suppress seizures — a key target
shared by anticonvulsants and anaesthetics.
Why is sodium valproate's use in women of childbearing potential so restricted?
Sodium valproate is restricted in women and girls able to bear children because it
is one of the most teratogenic of the common drugs.
Exposure in pregnancy carries a high risk of major congenital malformations,
particularly neural tube defects such as spina bifida, and, importantly,
a substantial risk of long-term neurodevelopmental harm in the child,
with reduced cognitive ability and an increased risk of autism,
even where there is no structural malformation.
Because of this, regulators have imposed a pregnancy-prevention programme:
valproate must not be used in women of childbearing potential unless other
treatments are unsuitable, and then only under specialist supervision with highly
effective contraception and full counselling, with annual review.
So valproate is severely restricted in women of childbearing potential because of
its high risk of neural tube and other malformations and of neurodevelopmental
harm, requiring, where it must be used,
a pregnancy-prevention programme with effective contraception and specialist
oversight — a major current safety issue in epilepsy treatment.
Describe the intravenous administration of phenytoin and its hazards.
Intravenous phenytoin, used for status epilepticus and loading,
must be given with particular care because of its cardiovascular and local hazards.
It is formulated in a strongly alkaline solution, which is irritant.
Given too rapidly, it causes hypotension,
bradycardia and serious cardiac arrhythmias,
partly from its own effect and partly from the propylene glycol diluent,
so it must be infused slowly, below a defined maximum rate,
with cardiac and blood-pressure monitoring.
Extravasation or intra-arterial injection causes severe local tissue injury,
including the purple-glove syndrome — a progressive discoloration,
oedema and ischaemia of the limb.
Fosphenytoin, a water-soluble prodrug of phenytoin,
is less irritant and can be given more rapidly with fewer infusion-site and
cardiovascular problems, and is often preferred.
So intravenous phenytoin must be infused slowly with cardiac monitoring because of
the risk of hypotension and arrhythmias,
and causes severe local injury on extravasation, the purple-glove syndrome;
fosphenytoin is a safer alternative.
Describe carbamazepine's autoinduction and interactions.
Carbamazepine is a potent inducer of the hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes,
with a distinctive feature: it induces the very enzymes that metabolise itself,
a phenomenon called autoinduction.
The consequence is that, over the first weeks of treatment,
carbamazepine accelerates its own clearance,
so its half-life shortens and its levels fall despite a constant dose,
requiring dose increases to maintain effect until a new steady state is reached —
important when initiating therapy.
Its enzyme induction also accelerates the metabolism of many other drugs,
reducing the effect of oral contraceptives, other anticonvulsants,
warfarin and numerous others, a major source of interactions,
and it lowers their levels.
So carbamazepine's autoinduction means it speeds its own metabolism over the first
weeks, requiring dose adjustment, and its broader enzyme induction reduces the
levels and effects of many co-administered drugs — a distinctive pharmacokinetic
property with important practical consequences for dosing and interactions.
Which anaesthetic drugs affect the seizure threshold?
Several anaesthetic and related drugs influence the seizure threshold,
relevant in the epileptic patient.
Many anaesthetics are predominantly anticonvulsant at usual doses — the
benzodiazepines and barbiturates strongly so, and propofol,
which has anticonvulsant properties and is used to terminate status,
though it can cause excitatory movements on induction that are not true seizures.
Conversely, some agents are potentially proconvulsant: enflurane, now little used,
was notably epileptogenic; sevoflurane can produce epileptiform activity on the
electroencephalogram, especially at high concentrations and with hyperventilation
in children; etomidate causes myoclonus, and ketamine has complex effects.
Among other drugs, certain antibiotics and the rapid reversal of opioids can lower
the threshold.
So most anaesthetics, especially the benzodiazepines, barbiturates and propofol,
are anticonvulsant, while sevoflurane at high concentrations,
the now-obsolete enflurane, and etomidate's myoclonus warrant awareness,
so that the anaesthetic for an epileptic patient is chosen to avoid lowering the
seizure threshold.
How is epilepsy managed in pregnancy?
Epilepsy in pregnancy requires balancing seizure control,
which is important for maternal and fetal safety,
against the teratogenicity of the drugs.
The principle is to maintain control on the most appropriate,
least teratogenic drug at the lowest effective dose,
ideally optimised before conception,
since uncontrolled seizures are themselves harmful.
Valproate is avoided wherever possible because of its high teratogenic and
neurodevelopmental risk; lamotrigine and levetiracetam have more reassuring safety
profiles and are often preferred.
Folic acid is given before and during pregnancy to reduce the risk of neural tube
defects. Drug levels may change in pregnancy,
requiring monitoring and dose adjustment,
and there is specialist multidisciplinary care.
So epilepsy in pregnancy is managed by maintaining control on the least teratogenic
effective drug — avoiding valproate,
favouring lamotrigine or levetiracetam — with folic acid supplementation,
level monitoring and specialist care,
balancing the harms of seizures against those of the drugs.
What is the place of therapeutic drug monitoring for the anticonvulsants?
Therapeutic drug monitoring — measuring plasma drug levels — is useful for some
anticonvulsants but not all, and is used selectively.
Phenytoin is the classic example where monitoring is valuable,
because of its saturable zero-order kinetics and narrow therapeutic index,
so that levels guide dosing and detect toxicity,
with interpretation adjusted for protein binding and albumin.
Levels are also used for some other agents to check adherence,
guide dosing in renal or hepatic impairment or pregnancy,
and investigate toxicity or loss of control.
However, for many newer drugs, such as levetiracetam,
routine monitoring is less established and treatment is guided primarily by the
clinical response — seizure control and adverse effects — with levels reserved for
specific questions.
So therapeutic drug monitoring is most valuable for phenytoin,
given its kinetics and narrow index,
and is used selectively for other agents to check adherence or guide dosing in
special situations, while treatment is generally guided by the clinical response.
Describe the gabapentinoids and other agents as anticonvulsants.
The gabapentinoids — gabapentin and pregabalin — act by binding the alpha-two-delta
subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels,
reducing the release of excitatory neurotransmitters;
they are used as add-on anticonvulsants for focal seizures and, more prominently,
for neuropathic pain and anxiety, with sedation and dizziness as their main effects
and a recognised potential for misuse.
Among other agents, ethosuximide blocks T-type calcium channels and is specifically
effective in absence seizures; topiramate has multiple mechanisms and broad
efficacy but cognitive and other adverse effects;
vigabatrin raises GABA by inhibiting its breakdown but causes visual field defects;
and newer agents such as perampanel, acting on glutamate AMPA receptors,
and brivaracetam, related to levetiracetam, add to the options.
So the gabapentinoids modulate calcium channels and are used more for neuropathic
pain than epilepsy, ethosuximide treats absences,
and a range of other agents with various mechanisms broaden the anticonvulsant
repertoire — the choice matched to the seizure type and patient.
Give a final integrated account of anticonvulsant use,
including the perioperative aspects.
I would understand the anticonvulsants by mechanism — sodium-channel blockade,
GABA enhancement, calcium-channel modulation,
synaptic-vesicle modulation and multi-mechanism action — matching the drug to the
seizure type, with broad-spectrum agents such as levetiracetam and valproate
covering most types, and respecting each drug's distinctive pharmacology:
phenytoin's zero-order kinetics, enzyme induction and hazardous intravenous
administration; carbamazepine's autoinduction and interactions;
valproate's teratogenicity restricting its use in women of childbearing potential;
lamotrigine's rash; and levetiracetam's favourable but behaviourally limited
profile.
Perioperatively I would continue antiepileptics without interruption,
substituting intravenously if needed,
anticipate that enzyme induction alters anaesthetic drug requirements including
resistance to neuromuscular blockers,
choose an anaesthetic that does not lower the seizure threshold,
correct metabolic precipitants, and manage status epilepticus in a stepwise manner
from benzodiazepine to second-line agent to anaesthesia.
So rational use is mechanism-based, mindful of distinctive kinetics and toxicity,
and perioperatively maintains uninterrupted control while anticipating drug
interactions and seizure-threshold effects.
Describe the barbiturates as anticonvulsants.
The barbiturates, principally phenobarbital, are among the oldest anticonvulsants,
acting at the GABA-A receptor where they prolong the opening of the chloride
channel in response to GABA, and at high doses open it directly,
enhancing inhibition and raising the seizure threshold.
Phenobarbital is broad-spectrum and effective and remains widely used where cost
and availability dictate, and thiopental, the anaesthetic barbiturate,
is used to terminate refractory status epilepticus.
Their drawbacks are sedation and, in children, behavioural and cognitive effects;
tolerance and dependence; potent induction of hepatic enzymes causing many
interactions; and, in overdose, dangerous respiratory and cardiovascular depression.
So the barbiturates such as phenobarbital enhance GABA-mediated inhibition by
prolonging chloride-channel opening,
are effective broad-spectrum anticonvulsants and, as thiopental,
terminate refractory status, but are limited by sedation, cognitive effects,
enzyme induction and the dangers of respiratory depression — older agents now
largely superseded except where cost or refractory status dictates.
Detail the use of benzodiazepines in seizure management.
The benzodiazepines are the first-line drugs for the acute termination of seizures,
acting rapidly at the GABA-A receptor to enhance inhibition by increasing the
frequency of chloride-channel opening.
In status epilepticus, intravenous lorazepam is preferred for its relatively long
duration of anticonvulsant effect; intravenous diazepam acts rapidly but
redistributes quickly, so its effect is shorter;
and midazolam is valuable for its versatility, given intramuscularly,
buccally or intranasally when intravenous access is unavailable,
including in the community and in children.
They are given once and repeated once if needed before moving to a second-line
agent. Their adverse effects are sedation and respiratory depression,
particularly with repeated doses, so airway and breathing must be supported.
So the benzodiazepines — lorazepam,
diazepam and midazolam — are the first-line agents to terminate acute seizures and
status epilepticus, acting rapidly at the GABA-A receptor,
with midazolam useful by non-intravenous routes,
limited by sedation and respiratory depression.
Give the full stepwise algorithm for status epilepticus.
The management of status epilepticus is a timed,
stepwise escalation alongside resuscitation.
In the first stage, the airway, breathing and circulation are secured,
oxygen given, and glucose and other reversible causes checked and corrected;
the first-line treatment is a benzodiazepine — intravenous lorazepam,
or intramuscular or buccal midazolam without access — repeated once after several
minutes if seizures continue.
If status persists — established status — a second-line intravenous anticonvulsant
is given: levetiracetam, phenytoin or fosphenytoin, or sodium valproate,
the choice guided by evidence showing broad equivalence.
If seizures continue despite these — refractory status — the patient requires
induction of general anaesthesia, with propofol,
thiopental or a midazolam infusion, intubation and ventilation,
and continuous electroencephalographic monitoring in intensive care to suppress
seizure activity, with treatment of the cause throughout.
So status epilepticus follows a stepwise algorithm — resuscitation and a
benzodiazepine first, a second-line agent such as levetiracetam,
phenytoin or valproate next, and general anaesthesia with monitoring for refractory
status — with continuous attention to the cause.
How are antiepileptic drugs chosen by seizure type?
The choice of antiepileptic is guided by the seizure type and epilepsy syndrome,
because some drugs are effective across types while others are specific or even
worsen certain seizures.
For focal seizures, sodium-channel blockers such as lamotrigine,
carbamazepine and levetiracetam are effective.
For generalised tonic-clonic seizures, broad-spectrum agents — valproate,
lamotrigine and levetiracetam — are used.
For absence seizures, ethosuximide and valproate are effective,
whereas carbamazepine and some others can worsen absences and myoclonus.
For myoclonic seizures, valproate and levetiracetam are used.
Valproate is broadly effective but avoided in women of childbearing potential,
so lamotrigine and levetiracetam are often chosen instead.
The aim is monotherapy at the lowest effective dose where possible.
So the antiepileptic is chosen by seizure type — sodium-channel blockers for focal
seizures, broad-spectrum agents for generalised,
ethosuximide or valproate for absences — avoiding agents that worsen particular
types and preferring monotherapy, with valproate's restrictions shaping the choice
in women.
What is the perioperative significance of phenytoin's protein binding?
Phenytoin is highly bound to plasma albumin, and only the unbound,
free fraction is pharmacologically active,
which has practical consequences for interpreting its levels and managing the
patient.
The standard measured total phenytoin level reflects the bound plus free drug,
and is interpreted assuming normal albumin and binding.
In states that reduce binding — hypoalbuminaemia, as in critical illness,
malnutrition or liver disease; renal failure, which alters binding; pregnancy;
and the displacement of phenytoin by other highly bound drugs — the free fraction
rises relative to the total, so that a total level in the apparently normal or low
range may correspond to a normal or even toxic free level.
The total level may therefore mislead,
and the free phenytoin level should be measured,
or a correction applied for the albumin.
So because only free phenytoin is active and it is highly protein-bound,
in hypoalbuminaemia, renal failure and drug displacement the free fraction rises,
so the total level misleads and the free level should be measured or corrected —
important in the critically ill perioperative patient.
Describe the interaction between lamotrigine and valproate.
The interaction between lamotrigine and valproate is a clinically important one
arising from their effects on metabolism.
Lamotrigine is metabolised by glucuronidation,
and sodium valproate inhibits this metabolism,
so when valproate is co-administered it raises the plasma level of lamotrigine and
prolongs its half-life substantially.
The practical consequence is that lamotrigine accumulates,
increasing the risk of its dose-related adverse effects,
in particular the serious rash that can progress to Stevens-Johnson syndrome,
which is already most likely when lamotrigine is introduced too quickly.
Therefore, when lamotrigine is started in a patient taking valproate,
it must be introduced at a much lower dose and titrated more slowly than usual.
Conversely, enzyme-inducing drugs lower lamotrigine levels.
So valproate inhibits the glucuronidation of lamotrigine,
raising its level and its half-life and increasing the risk of a serious rash,
so lamotrigine is started at a reduced dose and titrated slowly in patients on
valproate — an important and examinable anticonvulsant interaction.
What is the use of anticonvulsants in neuropathic pain?
Several anticonvulsants are effective in neuropathic pain,
which shares with epilepsy a basis in abnormal neuronal excitability,
so the drugs that dampen it are useful for both.
The gabapentinoids — gabapentin and pregabalin — binding the alpha-two-delta
calcium-channel subunit to reduce excitatory neurotransmitter release,
are first-line agents for neuropathic pain such as diabetic neuropathy and
post-herpetic neuralgia, and are used, with more caution now,
as perioperative analgesic adjuncts.
Carbamazepine is the specific first-line treatment for trigeminal neuralgia.
Other sodium-channel-blocking anticonvulsants and lacosamide have roles.
Their analgesic use is limited by sedation, dizziness and, for the gabapentinoids,
misuse potential.
So anticonvulsants are widely used in neuropathic pain — the gabapentinoids
first-line for conditions such as diabetic and post-herpetic neuralgia,
carbamazepine for trigeminal neuralgia — reflecting the shared mechanism of
abnormal excitability, with sedation and the misuse potential of the gabapentinoids
as the main limitations, relevant to their perioperative use.
What is SUDEP and why does it matter?
Sudden unexpected death in epilepsy, SUDEP, is the sudden,
unexpected death of a person with epilepsy in whom no other cause is found at
post-mortem, and it is an important cause of premature death in epilepsy.
Its mechanism is incompletely understood but is thought to involve seizure-related
cardiac arrhythmia, central respiratory depression with apnoea,
and autonomic dysfunction, typically occurring after a generalised tonic-clonic
seizure, often unwitnessed and at night.
The major modifiable risk factor is the frequency of generalised tonic-clonic
seizures, so the key to reducing the risk is good seizure control through adherence
to effective treatment, which underlines the importance of not interrupting
antiepileptic therapy, including perioperatively.
So SUDEP is sudden unexplained death in epilepsy,
probably from seizure-related arrhythmia and respiratory depression,
with uncontrolled generalised seizures the main risk factor,
making good seizure control and uninterrupted treatment — including across the
perioperative period — important in its prevention.
How and when are antiepileptic drugs withdrawn?
The withdrawal of antiepileptic drugs is considered in patients who have been
seizure-free for a sustained period, commonly around two years,
balancing the wish to avoid long-term medication against the risk of seizure
recurrence.
The decision is individualised, weighing factors that predict recurrence — the
epilepsy syndrome, the number and type of seizures, the electroencephalogram,
and the consequences of a recurrence for the individual,
such as for driving and occupation.
When withdrawal is undertaken, it is done gradually,
tapering the dose over weeks to months,
because abrupt withdrawal can precipitate seizures, including status epilepticus,
and only one drug is withdrawn at a time in those on more than one.
The patient is counselled about the recurrence risk and the implications.
So antiepileptic drugs may be withdrawn after a sustained seizure-free period,
the decision individualised by the recurrence risk and its consequences,
and always done gradually to avoid precipitating seizures — abrupt cessation,
including inadvertently in hospital, being hazardous.
Summarise the anaesthetic considerations for the patient with epilepsy.
Drawing the anaesthetic considerations together: first,
maintain seizure control by continuing the antiepileptic drugs uninterrupted
through the perioperative period, substituting by the intravenous route where the
oral is unavailable, since missed doses risk breakthrough seizures and even status.
Second, anticipate the pharmacological consequences of the drugs — the enzyme
induction of phenytoin, carbamazepine and barbiturates,
which accelerates the metabolism of anaesthetic drugs and causes resistance to
neuromuscular blockers, requiring objective monitoring,
and altered free phenytoin levels in hypoalbuminaemia.
Third, choose an anaesthetic that does not lower the seizure threshold,
favouring agents that are anticonvulsant and being mindful of potentially
epileptogenic effects such as high-concentration sevoflurane.
Fourth, correct metabolic precipitants.
Fifth, be prepared to recognise and manage a perioperative seizure or status.
So the epileptic patient requires uninterrupted antiepileptic therapy,
anticipation of enzyme-induction and protein-binding effects,
a seizure-threshold-conscious anaesthetic, correction of precipitants,
and readiness to treat seizures — a coherent, control-preserving approach.
How are seizures and the epilepsies classified?
Seizures are classified by their onset, which guides drug choice.
Focal seizures begin in one part of one cerebral hemisphere,
and may occur with retained or impaired awareness and may spread to become
bilateral; generalised seizures involve both hemispheres from the outset and
include tonic-clonic, absence, myoclonic, tonic and atonic types;
and some have an unknown onset.
The epilepsies are then classified into syndromes by the seizure types,
the age of onset, the electroencephalographic findings and the cause — which may be
genetic, structural, metabolic, infective, immune or unknown.
This classification matters because particular drugs suit particular seizure types
and some worsen others, and because the syndrome carries prognostic and treatment
implications.
So seizures are classified by onset into focal, generalised and unknown,
and the epilepsies into syndromes by seizure type, age,
electroencephalogram and cause — a classification that directs the choice of
anticonvulsant and the overall management.
What is the place of non-pharmacological treatments for epilepsy?
Where epilepsy is not controlled by drugs — drug-resistant epilepsy — several
non-pharmacological treatments have a place.
Epilepsy surgery, removing or disconnecting the epileptogenic focus,
can be curative in carefully selected patients with a localisable focus,
such as in temporal lobe epilepsy, after detailed evaluation.
The ketogenic diet, a high-fat, low-carbohydrate diet that shifts metabolism
towards ketones, reduces seizures in some patients,
particularly children with certain refractory epilepsies.
Neurostimulation techniques — vagus nerve stimulation,
and deep brain or responsive cortical stimulation — reduce seizure frequency in
those unsuitable for resective surgery. These are used within specialist epilepsy
services for drug-resistant cases.
So for drug-resistant epilepsy, non-pharmacological treatments include resective
surgery, which can be curative with a localisable focus,
the ketogenic diet especially in children,
and neurostimulation such as vagus nerve stimulation — specialist options when
drugs fail, complementing the pharmacological treatment.
Describe lacosamide and topiramate.
These are useful anticonvulsants with distinct features.
Lacosamide enhances the slow inactivation of the voltage-gated sodium channel,
a mechanism differing from the fast inactivation of the older sodium-channel
blockers, used for focal seizures as add-on or monotherapy and available
intravenously, which is convenient perioperatively and in status;
it can prolong the cardiac PR interval, so caution applies with conduction disease.
Topiramate has multiple mechanisms — sodium-channel blockade, GABA enhancement,
glutamate antagonism and carbonic anhydrase inhibition — giving broad efficacy,
and is used in epilepsy and migraine prophylaxis;
its adverse effects include cognitive slowing and word-finding difficulty,
paraesthesiae, weight loss, a risk of renal stones and metabolic acidosis from the
carbonic anhydrase inhibition, and angle-closure glaucoma.
So lacosamide enhances slow sodium-channel inactivation,
is available intravenously and may prolong the PR interval,
and topiramate is a multi-mechanism broad-spectrum agent for epilepsy and migraine,
limited by cognitive effects, renal stones and a carbonic-anhydrase-related
acidosis — useful additions with characteristic cautions.
Describe some of the newer antiepileptic agents.
The newer agents broaden the options, particularly for drug-resistant epilepsy.
Perampanel is a selective antagonist of the glutamate AMPA receptor,
reducing excitatory transmission, used as add-on therapy,
with psychiatric and behavioural adverse effects.
Brivaracetam is related to levetiracetam,
binding the same synaptic vesicle protein two-A with higher affinity,
used for focal seizures with a similar favourable profile and perhaps fewer
behavioural effects.
Cannabidiol, a non-psychoactive cannabis constituent,
is licensed for certain severe childhood epilepsy syndromes such as Dravet and
Lennox-Gastaut syndromes, where it reduces seizures.
Other agents include cenobamate and the older retigabine.
These expand the range of mechanisms available.
So newer antiepileptic agents include perampanel, an AMPA-receptor antagonist;
brivaracetam, a higher-affinity relative of levetiracetam;
and cannabidiol for specific severe childhood epilepsies — broadening the
mechanistic repertoire for drug-resistant epilepsy, each with its own profile.
What is the interaction between enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants and hormonal
contraception?
This is an important and frequently tested interaction.
The enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants — carbamazepine, phenytoin, phenobarbital,
and topiramate at higher doses — induce the hepatic enzymes that metabolise the
steroid hormones of combined and progestogen-only hormonal contraceptives,
accelerating their breakdown and reducing their plasma levels,
which can cause contraceptive failure and unintended pregnancy.
This matters greatly in women with epilepsy,
in whom an unplanned pregnancy carries the added risk of fetal exposure to
teratogenic anticonvulsants such as valproate.
The management is to use a reliable contraceptive method unaffected by enzyme
induction — such as an intrauterine device or a long-acting injectable — or,
where a hormonal method is used, to account for the interaction,
with specialist advice.
The non-enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants, such as levetiracetam,
do not have this effect, though lamotrigine has a reciprocal interaction with the
combined pill.
So enzyme-inducing anticonvulsants reduce the efficacy of hormonal contraception,
risking unintended pregnancy and teratogen exposure,
managed by using contraception unaffected by enzyme induction — a key interaction
in women with epilepsy.
What anaesthetic agents would you choose, and avoid, in the epileptic patient?
I would choose an anaesthetic that maintains seizure control and does not lower the
threshold.
Most induction and maintenance agents are safe and indeed anticonvulsant:
propofol is widely used and anticonvulsant,
though it can cause excitatory movements on induction that are not seizures;
the benzodiazepines and thiopental are anticonvulsant.
Among volatile agents, isoflurane and desflurane are acceptable,
while sevoflurane can produce epileptiform electroencephalographic activity at high
concentrations and with hyperventilation,
so I would avoid high concentrations and hyperventilation, particularly in children.
I would be cautious with etomidate, which causes myoclonus,
and with agents and circumstances that lower the threshold.
Among analgesics, I would avoid pethidine, whose metabolite is proconvulsant,
and use opioids judiciously.
I would maintain the antiepileptic drugs and anticipate enzyme-induction effects on
neuromuscular blockers.
So in epilepsy I would use propofol, benzodiazepines and acceptable volatiles,
avoid high-concentration sevoflurane with hyperventilation,
be cautious with etomidate, avoid pethidine,
and continue the antiepileptics — a threshold-conscious choice.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Anticonvulsants are grouped by mechanism:
sodium-channel blockers (phenytoin, carbamazepine, lamotrigine, lacosamide),
GABA enhancers (benzodiazepines, barbiturates),
calcium-channel modulators (ethosuximide for absences, gabapentinoids),
the synaptic-vesicle agent levetiracetam,
and multi-mechanism broad-spectrum drugs (valproate, topiramate).
Second, Phenytoin has saturable zero-order kinetics and a narrow therapeutic index,
potent enzyme induction and many interactions, with acute cerebellar,
chronic cosmetic (gingival hyperplasia) and IV cardiovascular adverse effects;
carbamazepine is an enzyme inducer causing hyponatraemia (SIADH) and serious skin
reactions (HLA-linked).
Third, Sodium valproate is broad-spectrum and an enzyme inhibitor but is
hepatotoxic and seriously teratogenic (restricted in women of childbearing
potential); lamotrigine needs slow introduction (rash/Stevens-Johnson);
levetiracetam is broad-spectrum, renally cleared with few interactions and
available IV, but causes behavioural effects.
Fourth, Status epilepticus is treated stepwise: a benzodiazepine first,
then a second-line IV agent (levetiracetam, phenytoin/fosphenytoin or valproate),
then general anaesthesia (propofol/thiopental/midazolam) for refractory status,
with simultaneous resuscitation and correction of causes.
5.
Enzyme induction by phenytoin, carbamazepine and barbiturates accelerates
anaesthetic drug metabolism, causing resistance to neuromuscular blockers and
altered drug handling; continue antiepileptics uninterrupted perioperatively
(substitute IV if needed), avoid lowering the seizure threshold,
and anticipate induction effects.
Thank you. That concludes the station.